Generative theory of tonal music

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation, search

A generative theory of tonal music (GTTM) is a theory of music^[1] conceived by
American composer and music theorist Fred Lerdahl and American linguist Ray
Jackendoff and presented in the 1983 book of the same title. It constitutes a
"formal description of the musical intuitions of a listener who is experienced
in a musical idiom"^[2] with the aim of illuminating the unique human capacity
for musical understanding.^[3]

The collaboration between Lerdahl and Jackendoff was inspired by Leonard
Bernstein's 1973 Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard University, wherein
he called for researchers to uncover a musical grammar that could explain the
human musical mind in a scientific manner comparable to Noam Chomsky's
revolutionary transformational or generative grammar.^[4]

Unlike the major methodologies of music analysis that preceded it, GTTM
construes the mental procedures under which the listener constructs an
unconscious understanding of music, and uses these tools to illuminate the
structure of individual compositions. The theory has been influential, spurring
further work by its authors and other researchers in the fields of music theory
, music cognition and cognitive musicology.^[5]

Contents

  • 1 The theory
      □ 1.1 The structures
          ☆ 1.1.1 I. Grouping structure
          ☆ 1.1.2 II. Metrical structure
          ☆ 1.1.3 III. Time-span reduction
          ☆ 1.1.4 IV. Prolongational reduction
      □ 1.2 More on TSR vs. PR
  • 2 The rules
      □ 2.1 I. Grouping structure rules
          ☆ 2.1.1 Grouping well-formedness rules (G~WFRs)
          ☆ 2.1.2 Grouping preference rules (G~PRs)
          ☆ 2.1.3 Transformational grouping rules
      □ 2.2 II. Metrical structure rules
          ☆ 2.2.1 Metrical well-formedness rules (M~WFRs)
          ☆ 2.2.2 Metrical preference rules (M~PRs)
          ☆ 2.2.3 Transformational metrical rule
      □ 2.3 III. Time-span reduction rules
          ☆ 2.3.1 Time-span segmentation rules
          ☆ 2.3.2 Time-span reduction well-formedness rules (TSR~WFRs)
          ☆ 2.3.3 Time-span reduction preference rules (TSR~PRs)
      □ 2.4 IV. Prolongational reduction rules
          ☆ 2.4.1 Prolongational reduction well-formedness rules (PR~WFRs)
          ☆ 2.4.2 Prolongational reduction preference rules (PR~PRs)
          ☆ 2.4.3 Prolongational reduction transformational rules
  • 3 Sources
  • 4 Further reading by the authors
      □ 4.1 Lerdahl
      □ 4.2 Jackendoff
      □ 4.3 Lerdahl and Jackendoff
      □ 4.4 Reviews of GTTM
  • 5 Further reading
  • 6 Bibliography on automation of GTTM
  • 7 See also
  • 8 References

The theory[edit]

GTTM focuses on four hierarchical systems that shape our musical intuitions.
Each of these systems is expressed in a strict hierarchical structure where
dominant regions contain smaller subordinate elements and equal elements exist
contiguously within a particular and explicit hierarchical level. In GTTM any
level can be small-scale or large-scale depending on the size of its elements.

The structures[edit]

I. Grouping structure[edit]

GTTM considers grouping analysis to be the most basic component of musical
understanding. It expresses a hierarchical segmentation of the piece into
motives, phrases, periods and still larger sections.

II. Metrical structure[edit]

Metrical structure expresses the intuition that the events of a piece are
related to a regular alternation of strong and weak beats at a number of
hierarchical levels. It is a crucial basis for all the structures and
reductions of GTTM.

III. Time-span reduction[edit]

Time-span reductions (TSRs) are based on information gleaned from metrical and
grouping structures. They establish tree structure-style hierarchical
organizations uniting time-spans at all temporal levels of a work.^[6] The TSR
analysis begins at the smallest levels, where metrical structure marks off the
music into beats of equal length (or more precisely into attack points
separated by uniform time-spans^[7]) and moves through all larger levels where
grouping structure divides the music into motives, phrases, periods, theme
groups and still greater divisions. It further specifies a “head” (or most
structurally important event) for each time-span at all hierarchical levels of
the analysis. A completed TSR analysis is often called a time-span tree.

IV. Prolongational reduction[edit]

Prolongational reduction (PR) provides our "psychological" awareness of tensing
and relaxing patterns in a given piece with precise structural terms. In
time-span reduction, the hierarchy of less and more important events is
established according to rhythmic stability. In prolongational reduction,
hierarchy is concerned with relative stability expressed in terms of continuity
and progression, the movement toward tension or relaxation, and the degree of
closure or non-closure. A PR analysis also produces a tree-structure style
hierarchical analysis, but this information is often conveyed in a visually
condensed modified "slur" notation.

The need for prolongational reduction mainly arises from two limitations of
time-span reductions. The first is that time-span reduction fails to express
the sense of continuity produced by harmonic rhythm.^[8] The second is that
time-span reduction—even though it establishes that particular pitch-events are
heard in relation to a particular beat, within a particular group—fails to say
anything about how music flows across these segments.^[9]

More on TSR vs. PR[edit]

It is helpful to note some basic differences between a time-span tree produced
by TSR and a prolongational tree produced by PR. First, though the basic
branching divisions produced by the two trees are often the same or similar at
high structural levels, branching variations between the two trees are often
observed as one travels further down towards the musical surface.

A second and equally important differentiation is that a prolongational tree
carries three types of branching: strong prolongation (represented by an open
node at the branching point), weak prolongation (represented by a filled node
at the branching point) and progression (represented by simple branching, with
no node). Time-span trees do not make this distinction. All time-span trees
branches are simple branches without nodes. (Although time-span tree branches
are often annotated with other helpful comments.)

The rules[edit]

Each of the four major hierarchical organizations (grouping structure, metrical
structure, time-span reduction and prolongational reduction) is established
through rules, which are divided into three categories:

 1. The well-formedness rules, which specify possible structural descriptions.
 2. The preference rules, which draw on possible structural descriptions
    eliciting those descriptions that correspond to experienced listeners’
    hearings of any particular piece.
 3. The transformational rules, which provide a means of associating distorted
    structures with well-formed descriptions.

I. Grouping structure rules[edit]

Grouping well-formedness rules (G~WFRs)[edit]

 1. "Any contiguous sequence of pitch-events, drum beats, or the like can
    constitute a group, and only contiguous sequences can constitute a group."
 2. "A piece constitutes a group."
 3. "A group may contain smaller groups."
 4. "If a group G[1] contains part of a group G[2], it must contain all of G
    [2]."
 5. 'If a group G[1] contains a smaller group G[2], then G[1] must be
    exhaustively partitioned into smaller groups."

Grouping preference rules (G~PRs)[edit]

 1. "Avoid analyses with very small groups – the smaller, the less preferable."
 2. (Proximity) Consider a sequence of four notes, n[1] – n[4], the transition
    n[2] – n[3] may be heard as a group boundary if: a.(slur/rest) the interval
    of time from the end of n[2] is greater than that from the end of n1 to the
    beginning of n[2] and that from the end of n[3] to the beginning of n[4] or
    if b.(attack/point) the interval of time between the attack point of n[2]
    and n[3] is greater than that between the attack points of n[1] and n[2]
    and that between the attack points of n[3] and n[4].
 3. (Change) Consider a sequence of four notes, n[1] – n[4], the transition n
    [2]-n[3] may be heard as a group boundary if marked by a. register, b.
    dynamics, c. articulation, d. length.
 4. (Intensification) "Where the effects pick out by a GPRs 2 and 3 are
    relatively more pronounced, a larger-level group may be placed."
 5. (Symmetry) "Prefer grouping analyses that most closely approach the ideal
    subdivision of groups into two parts of equal length."
 6. (Parallelism) "Where two or more segments of music can be construed as
    parallel, they preferably form parallel parts of groups."
 7. (Time-span and prolongational stability) "Prefer a grouping structure that
    results in more stable time-span and/or prolongational reductions."

Transformational grouping rules[edit]

 1. Grouping overlap (p. 60).
 2. Grouping elision (p. 61).

II. Metrical structure rules[edit]

Metrical well-formedness rules (M~WFRs)[edit]

 1. "Every attack point must be associated with a beat at the smallest metrical
    level present at that point in the piece."
 2. "Every beat at a given level must also be a beat at all smaller levels
    present at that point in that piece."
 3. "At each metrical level, strong beats are spaced either two or three beats
    apart."
 4. "The tactus and immediately larger metrical levels must consist of beats
    equally spaced throughout the piece. At subtactus metrical levels, weak
    beats must be equally spaced between the surrounding strong beats."

Metrical preference rules (M~PRs)[edit]

 1. (Parallelism) "Where two or more groups or parts of groups can be construed
    as parallel, they preferably receive parallel metrical structure."
 2. (Strong beat early) "Weakly prefer a metrical structure in which the
    strongest beat in a group appears relatively early in the group."
 3. (Event) "Prefer a metrical structure in which beats of level L[i] that
    coincide with the inception of pitch-events are strong beats of L[i]."
 4. (Stress) "Prefer a metrical structure in which beats of level L[i] that are
    stressed are strong beats of L[i]."
 5. (Length) Prefer a metrical structure in which a relatively strong beat
    occurs at the inception of either relatively long: a. pitch-event; b.
    duration of a dynamic; c. slur; d. pattern of articulation; e. duration of
    a pitch in the relevant levels of the time-span reduction; f. duration of a
    harmony in the relevant levels of the time-span reduction (harmonic
    rhythm).
 6. (Bass) "Prefer a metrically stable bass."
 7. (Cadence) "Strongly prefer a metrical structure in which cadences are
    metrically stable; that is, strongly avoid violations of local preference
    rules within cadences."
 8. (Suspension) "Strongly prefer a metrical structure in which a suspension is
    on a stronger beat than its resolution."
 9. (Time-span interaction) "Prefer a metrical analysis that minimizes conflict
    in the time-span reduction."
10. (Binary regularity) "Prefer metrical structures in which at each level
    every other beat is strong."

Transformational metrical rule[edit]

 1. Metrical deletion (p. 101).

III. Time-span reduction rules[edit]

Time-span reduction rules begin with two segmentation rules and proceed to the
standard WFRs, PRs and TRs.

Time-span segmentation rules[edit]

 1. "Every group in a piece is a time-span in the time-span segmentation of the
    piece."
 2. "In underlying grouping structure: a. each beat B of the smallest metrical
    level determines a time-span T[B] extending from B up to but not including
    the next beat of the smallest level; b. each beat B of metrical level Li
    determines a regular time-span of all beats of level L[i-1] from B up to
    but not including (i) the next beat B’ of level L[i] or (ii) a group
    boundary, whichever comes sooner; and c. if a group boundary G intervenes
    between B and the preceding beat of the same level, B determines an
    augmented time-span T’[B], which is the interval from G to the end of the
    regular time-span T[B]."

Time-span reduction well-formedness rules (TSR~WFRs)[edit]

 1. "For every time-span T there is an event e (or a sequence of events e[1] –
    e[2]) that is the head of T."
 2. "If T does not contain any other time-span (that is, if T is the smallest
    level of time-spans), there e is whatever event occurs in T."
 3. If T contains other time-spans, let T[1],...,T[n] be the (regular or
    augmented) time-spans immediately contained in T and let e[1],...,e[n] be
    their respective heads. Then the head is defined depending on: a. ordinary
    reduction; b. fusion; c. transformation; d. cadential retention (p. 159).
 4. "If a two-element cadence is directly subordinate to the head e of a
    time-span T, the final is directly subordinate to e and the penult is
    directly subordinate to the final."

Time-span reduction preference rules (TSR~PRs)[edit]

 1. (Metrical position) "Of the possible choices for head of time-span T,
    prefer that is in a relatively strong metrical position."
 2. (Local harmony) "Of the possible choices for head of time-span T, prefer
    that is: a. relatively intrinsically consonant, b. relatively closely
    related to the local tonic."
 3. (Registral extremes) "Of the possible choices for head of time-span T,
    weakly prefer a choice that has: a. a higher melodic pitch; b. a lower bass
    pitch."
 4. (Parallelism) "If two or more time-spans can be construed as motivically
    and/or rhythmically parallel, preferably assign them parallel heads."
 5. (Metrical stability) "In choosing the head of a time-span T, prefer a
    choice that results in more stable choice of metrical structure."
 6. (Prolongational stability) "In choosing the head of a time-span T, prefer a
    choice that results in more stable choice of prolongational structure."
 7. (Cadential retention) (p. 170).
 8. (Structural beginning) "If for a time-span T there is a larger group G
    containing T for which the head of T can function as the structural
    beginning, then prefer as head of T an event relatively close to the
    beginning of T (and hence to the beginning of G as well)."
 9. "In choosing the head of a piece, prefer the structural ending to the
    structural beginning."

IV. Prolongational reduction rules[edit]

Prolongational reduction well-formedness rules (PR~WFRs)[edit]

 1. "There is a single event in the underlying grouping structure of every
    piece that functions as prolongational head."
 2. "An event e[i] can be a direct elaboration of another pitch e[j] in any of
    the following ways: a. e[i] is a strong prolongation of e[j] if the roots,
    bass notes, and melodic notes of the two events are identical; b. e[i] is a
    weak prolongation of e[j] if the roots of the two events are identical but
    the bass and/or melodic notes differ; c. e[i] is a progression to or from e
    [j] if the harmonic roots of the two events are different."
 3. "Every event in the underlying grouping structure is either the
    prolongational head or a recursive elaboration of the prolongational head."
 4. (No crossing branches) "If an event e[i] is a direct elaboration of an
    event e[j], every event between e[i] and e[j] must be a direct elaboration
    of either e[i], e[j], or some event between them."

Prolongational reduction preference rules (PR~PRs)[edit]

 1. (Time-span importance) "In choosing the prolongational most important event
    e[k] of a prolongational region (e[i] – e[j]), strongly prefer a choice in
    which e[k] is relatively time-span important."
 2. (Time-span segmentation) "Let e[k] be the prolongationally most important
    region (e[i] – e[j]). If there is a time-span that contains e[i] and e[k]
    but not e[j], prefer a prolongational reduction in which e[k] is an
    elaboration of e[i]; similarly with the roles of e[i] and e[j] reversed."
 3. (Prolongational connection) "In choosing the prolongationally most
    important region (e[i] – e[j]), prefer an e[k] that attaches to as to form
    a maximally stable prolongational connections with one of the endpoints of
    the region."
 4. (Prolongational importance) "Let e[k] be the prolongationally most
    important region (e[i] – e[j]). Prefer a prolongational reduction in which
    e[k] is an elaboration of the prolongationally more important of the
    endpoints."
 5. (Parallelism) "Prefer a prolongational reduction in which parallel passages
    receive parallel analyses."
 6. (Normative prolongational structure) "A cadenced group preferably contains
    four (five) elements in its prolongational structure: a. a prolongational
    beginning; b. a prolongational ending consisting of one element of the
    cadences; (c. a right-branching prolongational as the most important direct
    elaboration direct of the prolongational beginning); d. a right-branching
    progression as the (next) most important direct elaboration of the
    prolongational beginning; e. a left-branching ‘subdominant’ progression as
    the most important elaboration of the first element of the cadence."

Prolongational reduction transformational rules[edit]

 1. Stability conditions for prolongational connection (p. 224): a. Branching
    condition; b. Pitch-collection condition; c. Melodic Condition; d. Harmonic
    Condition.
 2. Interaction principle: "In order to make a sufficiently stable
    prolongational connection e[k] must be chosen from the events in the two
    most important levels of time-span reduction represented in (e[i] – e[j])."

Sources[edit]

  • Lerdahl, Fred and Ray Jackendoff (1983). A generative theory of tonal
    music. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Further reading by the authors[edit]

Lerdahl[edit]

  • Lerdahl, Fred (1987). Timbral Hierarchies. Contemporary Music Review 2,
    no.1 , p. 135-60.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (1989). Atonal Prolongational Structure. Contemporary Music
    Review 3, no. 2., p. 65–87.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (1992). Cognitive Constraints on Compositional Systems.
    Contemporary Music Review 6, no. 2, p. 97–121.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (Fall 1997). Spatial and Psychoacoustic Factors in Atonal
    Prolongation.Current Musicology 63, p. 7–26.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (1998). Prolongational Structure and Schematic Form in
    Tristan's Alte Weise.Musicae Scientiae, p. 27–41.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (1999). Composing Notes. Current Musicology 67–68, p. 243-
    251.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (Autumn 2003). Two Ways in Which Music Relates to the World.
    Music Theory Spectrum 25, no. 2, p. 367-73.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (2001). Tonal Pitch Space. New York: Oxford University Press.
    391 pages. (This volume includes integrated and expanded versions of these
    articles: Lerdahl, Fred (Spring/Fall, 1988). Tonal Pitch Space. Music
    Perception 5, no. 3, p. 315-50; and Lerdahl, Fred (1996). Calculating Tonal
    Tension. Music Perception 13, no. 3, p. 319–363.
  • Lerdahl, Fred (2009): "Genesis and Architecture of the GTTM Project". Music
    Perception 26(3), DOI:10.1525/MP.2009.26.3.187, pp. 187–194.

Jackendoff[edit]

  • Jackendoff, Ray (1987): Consciousness and the Computational Mind.
    Cambridge: MIT Press. Chapter 11: Levels of Musical Structure.
  • Jackendoff, Ray (2009): "Parallels and Nonparallels Between Language and
    Music". Music Perception 26(3), pp. 195–204.

Lerdahl and Jackendoff[edit]

  • (Autumn 1979 – Summer 1980). Discovery Procedures vs. Rules of Musical
    Grammar in a Generative Music Theory. Perspectives of New Music 18, no. ½,
    p. 503-10.
  • (Spring 1981). Generative Music Theory and Its Relation to Psychology. In
    Journal of Music Theory (25th Anniversary Issue) 25, no. 1, p. 45–90.
  • (October 1981). On the Theory of Grouping and Meter. The Musical Quarterly
    67, no. 4, p. 479–506.
  • (1983). An Overview of Hierarchical Structure in Music.Music Perception 1,
    no. 2.

Reviews of GTTM[edit]

  • Child, Peter (Winter 1984). Review of A Generative Theory of Tonal Music,
    by Fred Lerdahl and Ray Jackendoff. Computer Music Journal 8, no. 4,
    p. 56–64.
  • Feld, Steven (March 1984). Review of A Generative Theory of Tonal Music, by
    Fred Lerdahl and Ray Jackendoff. Language in Society 13, no. 1, p. 133-35.
  • Hantz, Edwin (Spring 1985). Review of A Generative Theory of Tonal Music,
    by Fred Lerdahl and Ray Jackendoff. Music Theory Spectrum 1, p. 190–202.

Further reading[edit]

  • Sunberg, J. and B. Lindblom (1976). Generative theories in language and
    music description. Cognition, 4, 99–122.
  • Temperley, D. (2001). The cognition of basic musical structures. Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press.
  • Palme C. and C.L. Krumhansl (1987). Independent temporal and pitch
    structures in determination of musical phrases. Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13, 116–126.
  • Palmer C. and C.L. Krumhansl (1990). Mental representations for musical
    meter. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
    Performance, 16, 728–741.
  • Boros, James (Winter 1996). A Response to Lerdahl. Perspectives of New
    Music 34, no. 1, p. 252-58.
  • Foulkes-Levy, Lauradella (1996). A Synthesis of Recent Theories of Tonal
    Melody, Contour, and the Diatonic Scale: Implications for Aural Perception
    and Cognition. Ph.D. diss., State University of New York at Buffalo.
  • David Temperley (2007). Music and Probability. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bibliography on automation of GTTM[edit]

  • Lerdahl, F. (2009). Genesis and Architecture of the GTTM Project. Music
    Perception, 26, 187–194.
  • Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo, Masatoshi Hamanaka. An Automatic Music
    Analyzing System based on GTTM.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Satoshi Tojo: Interactive Gttm Analyzer, Proceedings of
    the 10th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval Conference
    (ISMIR2009), pp. 291–296, October 2009.
  • Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo, Masatoshi Hamanaka: Techniques for Implementing
    the Generative Theory of Tonal Music, ISMIR 2007(7th International
    Conference on Music Information Retrieval) Tutorial, September 2007.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: Implementing A Generating
    Theory of Tonal Music, Journal of New Music Research (JNMR), Vol. 35, No.
    4, pp. 249–277, 2006.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: FATTA: Full Automatic
    Time-span Tree Analyzer, Proceedings of the 2007 International Computer
    Music conference (ICMC2007), Vol. 1, pp. 153–156, August 2007.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: Grouping Structure
    Generator Based on Music Theory GTTM, Transactions of Information
    Processing Society of Japan, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 284–299, January 2007(in
    Japanese).
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: ATTA: Automatic Time-span
    Tree Analyzer based on Extended GTTM, Proceedings of the 6th International
    Conference on Music Information Retrieval Conference(ISMIR2005),
    pp. 358–365, September 2005.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: Automatic Generation of
    Metrical Structure based on GTTM, Proceedings of the 2005 International
    Computer Music conference(ICMC2005), pp. 53–56, September 2005.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: Automatic Generation of
    Grouping Structure based on the GTTM, Proceedings of the 2004 International
    Computer Music conference(ICMC2004), pp. 141–144, November 2004.
  • Masatoshi Hamanaka, Keiji Hirata, Satoshi Tojo: An Implementation of
    Grouping Rules of the GTTM: Itroducing of Parameters for Controlling Rules.
    Information Processing Society of Japan SIG Technical Report, Vol. 2004,
    No. 41, pp. 1–8, May 2004(in Japanese).
  • Lerdahl, F., & C.L. Krumhansl (2007). Modeling Tonal Tension. Music
    Perception, 24.4, 329–366.

See also[edit]

  • Cognitive Constraints on Compositional Systems

References[edit]

 1. ^ Lerdahl, Fred/Jackendoff, Ray (1983): A Generative Theory of Tonal Music,
    Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, p. 1.
 2. ^ Lerdahl, Fred/Jackendoff, Ray (1983): A Generative Theory of Tonal Music,
    Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, p. 1.
 3. ^ Lerdahl, Fred and Ray Jackendoff (1983). A generative theory of tonal
    music. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 4. ^ Chomsky, Noam (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton; Chomsky,
    Noam (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press;
    Chomsky, Noam (1966). Topics in the Theory of Generative Grammar. The
    Hague: Mouton.
 5. ^ Jackendoff, Ray (1987). Consciousness and the Computational Mind.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; Temperley, David (2001). The Cognition of Basic
    Musical Structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; Lerdahl, Fred (2001). Tonal
    Pitch Space. New York: Oxford University Press; Lerdahl, F., & R.
    Jackendoff (2006). The Capacity for Music: What Is It, and What's Special
    About It? Cognition, 100.1, 33–72.
 6. ^ Their function is double: they establish tree structure relations
    (time-span trees), and they provide rhythmic criteria to supplement pitch
    criteria that determine the structural importance of events (p. 119).
 7. ^ A time-span is a length of time spanning from one metrical event up to,
    but not including, the next event. (This is the minimal condition on
    time-spans.)
 8. ^ Harmonic rhythm is the pattern of durations produced by changes in the
    harmony at the musical surface.
 9. ^ F. Lerdahl and R. Jackendoff (1983). The generative theory of tonal music
    . p.122

                                   • v
                                   • t
                                   • e

                            Music psychology
                     • Biomusicology
                     • Cognitive musicology
                     • Cognitive neuroscience of music
      Areas          • Culture in music cognition
                     • Evolutionary musicology
                     • Psychoacoustics

                     • Absolute pitch
                     • Auditory illusion
                     • Auditory imagery
                     • Background music
                     • Consonance and dissonance
                     • Deutsch's scale illusion
                     • Earworm
                     • Embodied music cognition
                     • Entrainment
                     • Exercise and music
                     • Eye movement in music reading
                     • Franssen effect
                     • Generative theory of tonal music
                     • Glissando illusion
                     • Hedonic music consumption model
                     • Illusory continuity of tones
                     • Levitin effect
      Topics         • Lipps–Meyer law
                     • Melodic expectation
                     • Melodic fission
                     • Mozart effect
                     • Music and emotion
                     • Music and movement
                     • Music in psychological operations
                     • Music preference
                     • Music-related memory
                     • Musical gesture
                     • Musical semantics
                     • Musical syntax
                     • Octave illusion
                     • Relative pitch
                     • Shepard tone
                     • Temporal dynamics of music and language
                     • Tonal memory
                     • Tritone paradox

                     • Amusia
                     • Auditory arrhythmia
                     • Beat deafness
    Disorders        • Musical hallucinations
                     • Musician's dystonia
                     • Music-specific disorders
                     • Tone deafness

                     • Aesthetics of music
                     • Bioacoustics
                     • Ethnomusicology
                     • Hearing
                     • Melodic intonation therapy
                     • Music education
                     • Music therapy
                     • Musical acoustics
  Related fields     • Musicology
                     • Neurologic music therapy
                     • Neuronal encoding of sound
                     • Performance science
                     • Philosophy of music
                     • Psychoanalysis and music
                     • Sociomusicology
                     • Systematic musicology
                     • Zoomusicology

                     • Jamshed Bharucha
                     • Robert Cutietta
                     • Jane W. Davidson
                     • Irène Deliège
                     • Diana Deutsch
                     • Henkjan Honing
                     • Nina Kraus
                     • Carol L. Krumhansl
                     • Fred Lerdahl
                     • Daniel Levitin
   Researchers       • Leonard B. Meyer
                     • Max Friedrich Meyer
                     • James Mursell
                     • Richard Parncutt
                     • Oliver Sacks
                     • Carl Seashore
                     • Roger Shepard
                     • John Sloboda
                     • Carl Stumpf
                     • William Forde Thompson

                     • Musicophilia
                     • Music, Thought, and Feeling
Books and journals   • Psychology of Music (journal)
                     • Psychomusicology: Music, Mind and Brain (journal)
                     • The World in Six Songs
                     • This Is Your Brain on Music

*
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
Generative_theory_of_tonal_music&oldid=798332686"
Categories:

  • Music cognition
  • Music psychology
  • Music theory
  • Cognitive musicology

Hidden categories:

  • Use mdy dates from May 2016
  • Articles created via the Article Wizard

Navigation menu

Personal tools

  • Not logged in
  • Talk
  • Contributions
  • Create account
  • Log in

Namespaces

  • Article
  • Talk

Variants

Views

  • Read
  • Edit
  • View history

More

Search

[                    ][Search][Go]
 

Navigation

  • Main page
  • Contents
  • Featured content
  • Current events
  • Random article
  • Donate to Wikipedia
  • Wikipedia store

Interaction

  • Help
  • About Wikipedia
  • Community portal
  • Recent changes
  • Contact page

Tools

  • What links here
  • Related changes
  • Upload file
  • Special pages
  • Permanent link
  • Page information
  • Wikidata item
  • Cite this page

Print/export

  • Create a book
  • Download as PDF
  • Printable version

Languages

  • Deutsch
  • 日本語

Edit links

  • This page was last edited on 1 September 2017, at 08:23.
  • Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
     ; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms
    of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the
    Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  • Privacy policy
  • About Wikipedia
  • Disclaimers
  • Contact Wikipedia
  • Developers
  • Cookie statement
  • Mobile view

  • Wikimedia Foundation
  • Powered by MediaWiki

