11

by adding a third rule type, transformational rules, to the musical gram-
mar. The transformational rules apply certain distortions to the other-
wise strictly hierarchical structures provided by the well-formedness
rules. Although transformational rules have been central to linguistic
theory, they play a relatively peripheral role in our theory of music at
present,10

Figure 1.1 summarizes the form of the theory. The rectangles stand for
sets of rules, the ellipses and circles stand for inputs and outputs of rules,
and the arrows indicate the direction of formal derivation. Overall, the
system can be thought of as taking a given musical surface as input and
producing the structure that the listener hears as output. The meaning of
the intermediate steps will become clear as our exposition of the theory
proceeds.

In presenting the theory we discuss each component twice. First we
present its analytic system, the conceptions and notations needed to ex-
press intuitions relevant to that component. At the same time we deal
with the interaction of that component with the others and relate our
formulations to contrasting theoretical approaches. Then we present
each component's formal grammar, the system of rules that assigns that
component's contribution to the structural description of a piece. These
chapters are followed by further illustrations of the analytic system and
by remarks on various musical, psychological, and linguistic implications
of the theory.

Theoretical Perspective
