criteria of relative structural importance are, (2) what relationships may
obtain between more important and less important events, and (3) pre-
cisely what musical intuitions are conveyed by the reduction as a result of
1 and 2. We will develop two distinct conceptions of reduction within our
theory that differ in just these respects.

To convey an initial feeling for intuitions about structural importance,
consider the suspension chain in 5.2a. If the resolutions are omitted or
“reduced 0ut,” as in 5.2b, the sense of the passage is changed much more
radically than if the suspensions are omitted, as in 5.2c. In other words,
suspensions are heard as subordinate to, and hence as elaborations of,
their resolutions.

 

 

 

 

This sort of testing by omission is generally a useful guide for checking
reductional intuitions. To give another example, suppose that we were
listening to a recording of the scherzo of Beethoven's Sonata op. 10, no. 2
(5.3), and that a speck of dust obliterated the sound of event m. The
effect would be one of mild interruption. But if the cadence 7 were
obliterated, the effect would be far more disconcerting, because n is
structurally more important than ». In other words, it would change the
sense of a phrase more if its goal —a cadence—were omitted than i¡f an
event en route toward that goal were omitted.

 

 

107

Example 5.4 presents in preliminary form a complete reduction of the
first phrase of the Bach chorale “O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden.” The
first musical system represents the musical surface, and the systems below
stand for successive steps of omitting relatively ornamental events. At the
final step only the structurally most important event remains, in this
analysis the initial D major chord. (Other plausible reductions of this
passage are of course possible. Furthermore, note that in giving this
preliminary reduction we have as yet specified neither our criteria for
structural importance nor the relationships between important events

Reductions
