11
Music Theory as
Psychology

1
Theoretical Perspective

We take the goal of a theory of music to be a formal description of the
musical intuitions of a listener who is experienced in a musical idiom. To
explicate this assertion, let us begin with some general remarks about
music theory.

Music can be discussed in a number of ways. First, one can talk infor-
mally about individual pieces of music, seeking to illuminate their in-
teresting facets. This sort of explanation often can capture musical
insights of considerable subtlety, despite—or sometimes because of—its
unrigorous nature. Alternatively, one can attempt to create a systematic
mode of description within which to discuss individual pieces. Here one
addresses a musical idiom by means of an analytic method, be it as
straightforward as classifying pieces by their forms or putting Roman
numerals under chords, or as elaborate as constructing linear graphs. An
analytic method is of value insofar as it enables one to express insights
into particular pieces. The many different analytic methods in the litera-
ture differ in large part because of the nature and scope of the insights
they are intended to convey.

At a further level of generality, one can seek to define the principles
underlying an analytic system; this, in our view, constitutes a theory of
music. Such a theory can be viewed as a hypothesis about how music or a
particular musical idiom is organized, couched in terms of some set of
theoretical constructs; one can have a theory of Roman numerals, or
musical forms, or linear graphs.

Given a theory of music, one can then inquire as to the status of its
theoretical constructs. Medieval theorists justified their constructs partly
on theological grounds. A number of theorists, such as Rameau and
Hindemith, have based aspects of music theory on the physical principle
of the overtone series. There have also been philosophical bases for music
theory, for instance Hauptmann's use of Hegelian dialectic.
