33

and out-of-phase passages usually yield hypothesis B. The K. 331 passage
(2.21a) 15 an instance of the former and the opening of the third move-
ment of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony (2.21b) an example of the latter.

2.21

 

 

The case for the separation of metrical and structural accent can be
supported at more global levels by a consideration of the notions of
structural anacrusis and structural downbeat. A structural anacrusis is
like a local anacrusis except that it spans not just a beat or two but a
whole passage or section— for example, the transition to the finale of
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, or the introduction to Beethoven's First
Symphony (analyzed in section 7.4), or measures 1-20 of Beethoven's
“Tempest” Sonata (analyzed in section 10.2). In such cases a large-scale
group closes on a harmonic arrival (typically through an overlap or an
elision) in a strong metrical position. The effect is one of prolonged
tension followed by instantaneous release. In analytic terms, significant
articulations in three different musical parameters— grouping structure,
metrical structure, and harmonic structure—converge at a single mo-
ment, producing a structural downbeat. Thus there is an asymmetry be-
tween structural anacrusis and structural downbeat: the former stretches
over a long time-span, and the latter coincides with a beat.

Viewed purely as a structural accent, a structural downbeat is so pow-
erful because it combines the accentual possibilities of hypotheses A and
B: the structural anacrusis drives to its cadence (as in hypothesis B),
which simultaneously, by means of a grouping overlap, initiates a new
impulse forward at the beginning of the following section (as in hypothe-
sis A). This situation is diagrammed in figure 2.22.

Rhythmic Structure
