8.2

Preliminaries

to Prolongational
Trees

183

place. Somewhat relaxing 1s the restatement of an event in a more conso-
nant form (8.6e). The most relaxing kind of left branching is a progres-
sion to a completely different and more consonant event (8.6f).

It would be possible to devise still other kinds of right and left
branchings than those just described, corresponding to the many grada-
tions in tension and relaxation between events. Such a notational enrich-
ment, however, would come at the cost of analytic inclusiveness. For
example, one would like to be able to treat the configurations in 8.7,
despite surface differences, as functioning similarly in terms of tension
and relaxation.

8.7

 

 

Under the scheme just outlined, they are all left-branching progressions
(as in 8.6f); greater specificity in branching connections would obscure
what they have in common. We believe that the three kinds of connection
introduced here, together with their right and left branchings, strike the
right balance between diversity and generality. As will be seen shortly,
the concatenation of these simple relationships will lead to more than
enough complexity.

The prolongational connections just discussed have been considered only
for two isolated events. The Reduction Hypothesis demands that such
connections be drawn for all the events in a piece. To do this we must
have a conception of the successive stages, or domains, of analysis, in
which events become available for connection. In time-span reduction
this task was relatively straightforward, since the stages were defined by
the time-span segmentation. In prolongational reduction, by contrast, the
domains of analysis are less predetermined, and consequently are rather
difficult to explain; moreover, they cannot be explained prior to the
actual building of trees. It is therefore convenient to circumvent this
problem for the moment and to turn to tree building as if the problem
were already solved.

Before we can proceed we must satisfy a further demand of the Strong
Reduction Hypothesis, namely that events be analyzed in a strict hier-
archy. In terms of the tree notation this means that all branchings must be
either right or left; there can be no event that is either equivalent to
another event or an insertion between two superordinate events. This

Prolongational Reduction
