41

Examining simple visual perception again, we see that like shapes tend
to be grouped together. In 3.9a the middle shape tends to form a group
with the two left shapes, since they are all squares; in 3.9b the middle
shape groups with the two right shapes, which are circles.

3.9
a b
LIDdOoo LILIOOO

Similarly, as Wertheimer points out, equally spaced notes will group by
likeness of pitch. In 3.10a the middle note is grouped most naturally with
the two left notes; in 3.10b with the two right notes (assuming all notes
are played with the same articulation and stress and are free of contrary
harmonic implications, since these factors can also affect grouping
intuitions).

3.10

a b

Considerably weaker effects are produced by making the middle note not
identical in pitch to the outer pitches, but closer to one than the other, as

in 3.11a and 3.11b. If the middle pitch is equidistant from the outer
pitches, as in 3.11c, grouping intuitions are indeterminate.

3.11
a b c

These examples have demonstrated two basic principles of visual and
auditory grouping: groups are perceived in terms of the proximity and
the similarity of the elements available to be grouped. In each case,
greater disparity in the field produces stronger grouping intuitions and
greater uniformity throughout the field produces weaker intuitions.

Next consider fields in which both principles apply. In 3.12a the prin-
ciples of proximity and similarity reinforce each other since the two
circles are close together and the three squares are close together; the
resulting grouping intuition is quite strong. In 3.12b, however, one of the
squares is near the circles, so the principles of proximity and similarity
are in conflict. The resulting intuition is ambiguous: one can see the
middle square as part of either the left or the right group (it may even

spontaneously switch, in a fashion familiar from other visually ambigu-
ous configurations such as the well-known Necker cube). As the middle

Grouping Structure
